[PROTOCOL RFC] Variant Shredding (#4033)
delta-io/delta: protocol_rfcs/variant-shredding.md

# Variant Shredding
**Associated Github issue for discussions: https://github.com/delta-io/delta/issues/4032**

This protocol change adds support for Variant shredding for the Variant data type.
Shredding allows Variant data to be be more efficiently stored and queried.

--------

> ***New Section after the `Variant Data Type` section***

# Variant Shredding

This feature enables support for shredding of the Variant data type, to store and query Variant data more efficiently.
Shredding a Variant value is taking paths from the Variant value, and storing them as a typed column in the file.
The shredding does not duplicate data, so if a value is stored in the typed column, it is removed from the Variant binary.

> Storing Variant values as typed columns is faster to access, and enables skipping with statistics.

Author: Done

The `variantShredding` feature depends on the `variantType` feature.

To support this feature:
- The table must be on Reader Version 3 and Writer Version 7
- The feature `variantType` must exist in the table `protocol`'s `readerFeatures` and `writerFeatures`.
- The feature `variantShredding` must exist in the table `protocol`'s `readerFeatures` and `writerFeatures`.

## Shredded Variant data in Parquet

Shredded Variant data is stored according to the [Parquet Variant Shredding specification](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/VariantShredding.md)
The shredded Variant data written to parquet files is written as a single Parquet struct, with the following fields:

Struct field name | Parquet primitive type | Description
-|-|-
metadata | binary | (required) The binary-encoded Variant metadata, as described in [Parquet Variant binary encoding](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/VariantEncoding.md)
value | binary | (optional) The binary-encoded Variant value, as described in [Parquet Variant binary encoding](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/VariantEncoding.md)

> typed_value | * | (optional) This can be any Parquet type, representing the data stored in the Variant. Details of the shredding scheme is found in the [Parquet Variant binary encoding](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/VariantEncoding.md)

Reviewer: I'm having trouble reconciling how column names work in the variant spec, variant shredding spec, and this RFC?
* Variant spec says we have two fields: `metadata` and `value` (both non-null)
* Shredding spec says we have five fields: `metadata`, `variant_value`, `typed_value`, `object`, `array` (all optional except `metadata`)
* This RFC says we have three fields: `metadata`, `value`, `typed_value` (all optional except `metadata`)?

It's not clear to me why shredding needed to replace `value` with` variant_value` (probably out of scope for this PR), but in any case this RFC doesn't seem to accurately reflect the parquet variant shredding spec?

Reviewer: Also, the second link is the same as the first (points to the parquet variant spec). Should it actually point to the parquet variant shredding spec?

Author: Yeah, the updated shredded spec was just merged, which this Delta RFC was describing. The shredding spec now has the 3 fields: `metadata`, `value`, `typed_value`

I also updated the link to point to the shredding one. Thanks!

> typed_value | * | (optional) This can be any Parquet type, representing the data stored in the Variant. Details of the shredding scheme is found in the [Parquet Variant binary encoding](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/VariantShredding.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
typed_value | * | (optional) This can be any Parquet type, representing the data stored in the Variant. Details of the shredding scheme is found in the [Parquet Variant Shredding specification](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/VariantShredding.md)
```

## Writer Requirements for Variant Shredding

When Variant Shredding is supported (`writerFeatures` field of a table's `protocol` action contains `variantShredding`), writers:
- must respect the `delta.enableVariantShredding` table property configuration. If `delta.enableVariantShredding=false`, a column of type `variant` must not be written as a shredded Variant, but as an unshredded Variant. If `delta.enableVariantShredding=true`, the writer can choose to shred a Variant column according to the [Parquet Variant Shredding specification](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/VariantShredding.md)

## Reader Requirements for Variant Shredding

When Variant type is supported (`readerFeatures` field of a table's `protocol` action contains `variantShredding`), readers:
- must recognize and tolerate a `variant` data type in a Delta schema

> - must tolerate a parquet schema that is either unshredded (only `metadata` and `value` struct fields) or shredded (`metadata`, `value`, and `typed_value` struct fields) when reading a Variant data type from file.

Reviewer: What does "tolerate" mean in this context?

Author: I changed it to "correctly process". Is there a better way to state that a shredded reader must be able to process parquet files which are shredded or unshredded?

Reviewer: "correctly process" should work
